[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HORN HONKING]
>> I bought my first van in the
summer of 2013 because I was
sick of wasting
money on hotel rooms.
In addition to being a
filmmaker, I'm also an author.
I've written several books,
and I used to go on book tours
all the time, which
basically means
that I would spend between 150
and 200 days a year traveling.
And it also means that I
used to spend between $15,000
and $20,000 on hotel stays.
Now, the worst part about it was
that I didn't really even get
to enjoy these hotel rooms.
I barely set foot
in them, actually.
Typically, how it would go
is I would go to town or city
and I would teach a class.
I would do a book signing.
And at the very end of the night
I'd go back to the hotel room
and I would just literally
throw my bones on the bed
and go to sleep.
Six hours later I'd wake
up, I'd get in the car
and go to the next location.
So this expense sucked.
It was 100% unnecessary.
And the rational
part of my brain
told me that something
had to change.
Prior to purchasing
a Sprinter van
I did quite a bit of
deliberating about which
vehicle would be best for me.
I needed a car that
was both volumous,
I needed a lot of room for
books and heavy film equipment,
but I also needed fuel economy.
I needed a car that I could
criss-cross the entire United
States in and I wouldn't just
get pillaged at the gas pump.
Initially, I had my eyes
set on a VW Euro van.
But after perusing
countless auto listings
I quickly learned that
a 20-year-old beat up
microbus with over
200,000 miles on it sells
for between 20 and 25 grand.
This seemed like a
ridiculous amount
to pay for an old van that
could fall apart at any moment.
So I kept looking.
I looked into other
options as well,
such as trucks and campers,
pull-behind trailers and RVs,
but was ultimately deterred
by high mileage, low fuel
economy, lack of reliability,
and or hefty price tags.
Then during a work
trip to Europe
I discovered the Sprinter
van, and boy, was it glorious.
There was nothing embarrassing
or shameful about this van
whatsoever.
It was spacious,
it was practical,
and yet it was somehow classy.
And I instantly wanted one.
So when I returned home
from my overseas trip,
I googled Sprinter van.
I went down to my local Mercedes
dealership and I bought one.
I remember feeling
extremely nervous
because I'd never bought a
new vehicle before, let alone
one with a $40,000 price tag.
But again, the money that I
was shucking out on hotel stays
helped justify the purchase.
I've owned my van
for five years,
and I'm proud to
report that I've never
had one ounce of regret.
There's been no buyer's remorse.
Out of all the
different vehicles
that I've owned in
the past, this van
is by far my favorite vehicle
and I absolutely love it.
I like to compare my van to the
transition from a T9 cell phone
to a cell phone with
a full keyboard.
So if you recall,
back in the day,
we used to have those
brick Nokia phones.
And on those phones you had
to hit each button three times
to get a desired letter.
So texting was a
pain in the butt.
And then we all got phones
with full keyboards, which
means that we could now
write text much quicker,
it was much more convenient.
Our minds were blown
and it was evident
that we're never going
back to the old ways.
It just seems archaic
now to do that, right?
Same thing with a van.
When you experience
firsthand what
it's like to be able to freely
move around in your vehicle,
to get up from the driver's
seat and then go into the back,
maybe when it's raining
or snowing outside,
and yet you're comfortable,
you're standing upright,
you're warm and cozy, this
is an incredible feeling.
And you just can't replicate
it in other vehicles.
So once you experience the
comfort and the convenience
of the van you can't go back
to a sedan or a station wagon.
It's just not happening.
It goes without saying
that paying for hotel rooms
is now a thing of
the past for me.
Now when I travel I stay in
my vehicle, and in doing this
I save heaps of dough.
And I'm way more
comfortable because I
get to sleep in my own bed
surrounded by my own smells
every night.
In addition to being
great work vehicles,
vans are also
fantastic for leisure.
Whether you're going
adventuring with your buddies
or visiting relatives in another
town, traveling by way of van
allows you to be more
spontaneous, more flexible,
self-reliant, and free.
Presently I don't live
in my van full time.
I use it more like a weekender.
So my girlfriend has a house.
I live there.
And then whenever we want to go
adventuring, we fill up the van
and we go.
Whether that be for a weekend,
or a week, or a month,
this works really well for us.
And so we'd like
to think about it
kind of like in
spaceship terms, where
the house is the mothership
and the van is the rocket.
And every so often the van has
to resupply like rockets do,
and then we fly off somewhere
else, and go exploring,
go have fun, go
to work, whatever.
During the first couple
years of van ownership,
one thing that I
remember very distinctly
is that people used to
stop me on the street.
Random strangers would
stop me on the street
and they'd ask me a plethora
of different questions.
They would ask me things like,
what kind of van is that?
Do you like your van?
What kind of gas
mileage do you get?
Where do you get it?
How much was it?
Et cetera, et cetera.
And then one day all
the questions stopped.
And people just stopped
coming up to me, period.
And it was kind of strange
because it happened
consistently, and then boom.
Nothing.
After pondering on
this for a while
I figured that the shift
had to do with the fact
that there are more
vans on the road.
While vans and van
life have been around
since the early '60s,
we are currently
seeing one of the biggest van
booms in history right now.
[CHEERING]
If you look at commercial
vans sales in America
alone since about 2016, you'll
notice that Ford Transits,
they're the leaders in the US.
They sell about
14,000 vans a month.
Chevy Express sells
6,000 vans a month.
Ford E-Series, 5.8.
Dodge pro master is
next at 3.3 thousand.
Mercedes Benz is
close behind at 3,000,
and the Nissan NV Series
sells about 1.7 thousand vans
per month.
So that's roughly 33,000
vans per month total,
and 405,000 vans per
year in the US alone.
I'm no expert, but 405,000
new vans on the road per year
seems like a lot of vans.
Maybe that's why it feels like
vans are everywhere these days,
because they literally are.
Globally, vans appear
to be trending as well.
In the first half of
2017 Mercedes Benz
reported that it sold
nearly 200,000 vans,
mainly Sprinters and
Metris's worldwide.
This marked the
fifth year in a row
that their van division
experienced significant growth.
And according to
expert projections,
this trend will only
continue to increase.
In addition to
these sales figures,
today there's way more resources
about vans and van life
than ever before.
There are literally
countless blogs and websites
and social media accounts and
YouTube videos about vans.
And so people have
a lot more ways
that they can learn
about van life, which
means they no
longer have to stop
random strangers on
the street like myself
and get information
directly from them.
So what is this all about?
Why are vans booming?
Clearly there is
a need out there
that these vehicles are meeting.
And yet the answer to
this is anybody's guess.
In fact, even Mercedes
Benz has no idea.
And I know this
because they actually
sent me an email where
they said, "Sergei,
why is it that you
think vans are booming?"
So, you know, when they're
asking somebody like myself,
I can only assume that they
have questions as to why this is
happening and what's going on.
Major publications such as "The
New Yorker," "Time," and "Vice"
have their own speculations.
In one way or another
they all claim
vans are trending because van
life is the new American dream.
This intrigues me
for several reasons.
Number one, it's a
big bold statement
that I automatically
want to challenge.
And number two, it very
well might be true.
Is van life really the
next American dream?
If so, then why?
Are people moving
into vans because they
can no longer afford to
live in traditional houses?
Or are they simply
shifting their values
because they're finding that
alternative lifestyles make
them more fulfilled and happy?
Maybe that's what's going on.
If this is the case,
does van living
actually make people
more happy and fulfilled?
Is this a sustainable lifestyle?
I want to know if van life is
a trend that will someday pass
and we'll think, "Oh my
god, I can't believe we ever
thought this was
cool," or perhaps this
is a viable lifestyle
that's here to stay.
I've decided to act
on this curiosity
and make a movie that
investigates this fan boom.
This summer I'm going to
jump into my Sprinter van,
and I'm going to go
wherever the wind blows
me to try and interview
as many different people
as I can that are in some way,
shape, or form tied to vans.
I want to sit down with as
many different demographics
as I can.
This being young couples,
seasoned vanners,
solo travelers,
nomadic families,
companies that manufacture
vans and van products,
and anyone else that's
willing to talk to me.
And I want to get
down to the bottom
of why vans are so popular.
I have no clue whatsoever
if this is a good idea,
if this movie will
be interesting.
But I have this genuine
curiosity and I'm going for it.
>> OK.
So I suppose you
want a van tour.
Let's check it out.
All right.
This is our cozy
little Sprinter van.
This is our bed.
It's a twin, so we snuggle.
Underneath we have storage
for our camping stove,
extra camping gear, clothes.
And then up top we
have cargo nets, which
we can store our curtains, or
window shades, or more clothes.
We also have little utility
racks and cute hangers
as well as some sparkle lights.
Let's go around back and
I'll show you some more.
So in the back here we
have our kettle bells.
This is how we work out
when we're on the road.
And they also provide
extra weight and traction
for the van.
So this is another view
of the van from the back.
As you can see,
it's super simple.
We don't live in the van, we
take it for weekend trips,
so this simple setup
works really great for us.
OK.
On the back of the
van we have a ladder.
It's made by Prime Design,
and it gets us to the top.
Let's go.
Here we have a little deck
made of plastic pallets.
It's perfect for stargazing,
taking naps, or having picnics.
And extra storage if needed.
Also on the roof we
have a road shower.
It's exactly what
it sounds like, it's
a shower for the road.
And it gives us the
opportunity to clean off
after surfing, or being in
the lake, or clean the car.
Whenever we desire.
So everything I just showed
you on top of the roof
is attached to the
roof via our roof rack.
The Alurack by Prime Design.
The last thing I want to
show you is our VertiRack.
It allows us to store
our paddle boards
on the outside of the
van, which frees up
space inside of the van for us.
So that's our van in a nutshell.
>> So today is June 2nd.
We're officially kicking off
the production of "Van Boom."
We start filming today.
And we're heading from
Tacoma, Washington
up to Bellingham to take
part in a van life festival.
This festival is
hosted by Freedom Vans.
They're an outfitter that
customizes Sprinter vans,
and Ford vans, every
other kind of van.
And so we're going to go
meet some cool people,
see some cool vans,
and hopefully gather
some interviews.
>> OK.
What do I think
we're going to learn
while making this documentary?
I hope to learn the real
truth about van life.
Because on Instagram
and social media
it just looks so gosh darn fun.
And I want to know if
it's really that amazing,
and how much you have to make
to afford that kind of life,
and what kind of jobs you can
have to live that kind of life.
Because it seems like
an expensive lifestyle.
And to have an expensive
lifestyle you need a job.
But if you're living
out of your van
you can't always have
a traditional job.
I don't think I want
to live in a van
myself, though maybe someday
it would be a possibility.
But I think it's interesting to
know all this because there's
a lot of people out there
who are considering it,
and a lot of people who
are considering buying
a van over buying a house.
I just bought a
house, so I'm going
to live in the house
and not the van.
But maybe other people will
choose the other way around.
I'm just a little
confused sometimes,
because a lot of
people when they
go into living in
a van they say it's
because they can't afford to
buy a house or live in a house.
I-- when you buy
a van, it costs--
if you buy a new van it costs
roughly, like, $40,000, Sergei?
>> Yep.
>> Yes.
OK.
And then if you
want a really nice
build, like
something comfortable
where you have a kitchen
and you can actually
live in it, that's at
least another 60 grand,
I would think.
Probably more.
But so you're up to
100 grand in this van.
I live in an area
that is appreciating,
so if I decide to sell
the house in five years
I will make money off
of living in my home.
If you have a van they just
break down, you put on miles.
So there's no way
that you're going
to make money off of your van.
You're only going to
lose money in the end.
So I don't see the
benefit, or I don't
see how people say it's cheaper
than buying your own home.
Hopefully, through
this documentary
we'll get to the bottom of that.
And people can explain why it's
cheaper than owning a home.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Who says you can't have a lot
of shoes if you live in a van?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name's Tom.
I run a company with my partner,
Kyleigh, called Freedom Vans.
And we are all
about giving people
chances to live off the grid.
Sidestep mortgage if you want.
You can live out of your
van, have solar power,
have all your amenities,
comfortable living space,
all in a tiny little
space on wheels.
Vans are popular and
gaining popularity
because they take the
automotive industry
and basically combine
all of their genres
into one space that performs
as well as each of them
and actually outperforms
a lot of them.
They are people carriers,
they're efficient on fuel,
they can load a lot of job
materials, heavy equipment.
They can get from
A to B comfortably.
They do it all.
I got inspired for
the van life movement
because of housing crisis.
I'm a dog owner, but I'm
not wealthy home owner
at the same time.
And so when I tried to move from
one lease to find a new place,
I couldn't get anything.
Nobody would sign me up.
"You have a dog, you
can't rent here."
And then I had a van that I
used to travel for mountain bike
racing.
And I started
feeling like I wasn't
going to have a catch net to
land in when my lease ended.
And I was like, "I'm not
going to be homeless."
So I took matters
into my own hands.
And I built myself a weekender
I built a little Ford
Econoline from the mid 90s
that was an old conversion van.
I gutted it and I
put a desk in there
that I used for a counter.
I built the power system,
and stuffed a fridge,
and cut in a sink, and glued
a microwave to the desk.
I didn't know how to do
pumps, but I found a pond pump
and it worked.
So that was kind of how
it all started for me.
And I just felt
so liberated when
I figured out I
could comfortably
live for a month out of a van.
For one whole month I
didn't have a house.
So then I realized
van life was sweet.
It was simple, 100% liberating.
I felt no longer
like I was trapped
by expensive real estate
that I couldn't afford.
I felt like for a
low investment I
could get a comfortable
space, and that sort of stair
stepped me up to doing that
same thing for other people now.
A lot of the things
that we do build
are for people who
are gone weekenders.
You know, they're
a weekend warrior,
they want to go traveling,
get out of town.
Stress relief, you
know, vacation stuff.
That's important, and it
matters a lot to everybody.
So you need to be
able to do that.
But then there's also
the people like traveling
nurses who are going somewhere
for seven weeks at a time.
They've got a traveling
stipend and they're
getting paid for housing.
My first full-time client-based
Freedom Van was Dana.
She has her van named Amelia.
She lives out of
it in California.
And that is a good
example of a new way
of thinking about how you can
approach your living space.
She pays about $700
a month, is her van
plus conversion payment.
It was all worked in
on the same purchase.
So her van purchase
and her conversion
were lumped into one, and the
cost is about $700 a month.
She owns it via the bank, but
in an area where a one bedroom
apartment is $2,200,
San Francisco Bay area
is $2,300 to $2,600 for
a one bedroom apartment.
So her one bedroom van in the
spaces she was traveling in
is $700 a month.
And that's a pretty good system,
when you look at the numbers.
>> I think that
economically it makes sense,
and there's a lot of people
turning to van life for that
reason.
But the motivator is more
that our Millennials,
they're all coming
of age to buy things.
And they're seeing all these
vans and these epic photos
on Instagram.
And they see that and
then they want to live it.
>> The pictures you see of
people living on Instagram,
and they're just always
having a joyous time,
everything's perfect.
>> Yeah.
>> How does van life on social
media differ from real van
life?
>> Yeah, I think that social
media just gives you a glimpse
of what van life is.
Yes, you're in all of
these beautiful places
and you're having all
these experiences.
But I think what I miss the
most was experiencing them
with other people.
And that's definitely
becoming easier
as more people are into
van life and more people
are traveling with
their friends.
But when we were on the road,
our friends were more grounded
and couldn't necessarily
travel everywhere with us.
So I missed just having people
that I saw all the time,
and that community feeling.
So it's nice to see people who
are doing van life are building
those communities.
But again, that's just a
glimpse on social media.
I'm not sure how that actually
translates into real life.
It didn't translate for me.
>> What about the aspect of
social media that's like,
everyone posts their
beautiful photos,
and it just looks so idealistic.
Is it really like that?
>> Yeah, so these
beautiful photos, honestly,
van life brought me to
the most beautiful places.
And sometimes I think
back on my own photos
like, I just need
that right now.
And I'm really fortunate
to live in a place that
has all these beautiful
lakes and trees.
And I think that's
why we ended up here
after traveling
to so many places
to see where we
really wanted to be.
Yeah, I just think back on some
of these photos that I took
and how much I
enjoyed those days.
And those little
glimpses, there's
so much to those days
that are actually
not portrayed in the photos.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So this is the
Noggin van crib.
It's a 1995 Dodge
All Transit Vehicle.
We call her Rammie.
We designed the bed,
the kitchen, everything,
so it would be extremely
useful and beneficial
to our kind of lifestyle that
we thought we'd be living.
And then in this
back unit here we
have designed this huge kind
of box which is mainly storage
but you can also have a
person or to sleep on this.
This unit pops out.
And the cool thing
about this is her
and I could both work
on our laptops all day.
We have little cushions that
you can sit on the wheel wells.
And so we built out
these wood little things.
And then we have cushions.
And then you could sit here
and work for eight hours.
So it's extremely useful for
both of us to work and live.
We both kind of have our
own spaces when we need it,
which is great.
Just kind of like having a
house or a separate room.
Or you know, go
to a coffee place
or pop out of the
van for a little bit.
>> What is the cost of van life?
Everybody talks about how much
cheaper it is than house life.
Did you do any--
actual any calculation?
>> Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah.
>> So what does van life cost?
>> So van life for us, like,
so we have an apartment here
in Bellingham, at Darby.
It was $1,000 a month.
And then you have
internet and utilities,
and so it's about
13, 14 a month.
And that was about
two years ago.
So we hopped in the van.
We were spending, with
all of our bills together
and everything in our
relationship, about $3,000
a month.
So we had a lot of bills.
We had student debts,
and credit cards,
and starting the business,
and all this expense.
We hopped in the van and we were
able to immediately get down
to like $1,500.
And then we started looking
at our food expenses in LA.
Well, I have a
problem with sushi,
and really I love Thai food.
And so we were going
out to eat a lot.
And we're like, OK, we can
really cut this down even more.
Then we started
cooking every day.
Then we started getting into
the more of the vegan lifestyle
and food, you know,
fruits and vegetables,
and raw organic kind of cooking.
And that really
saved a lot of money.
And so then we were down
like $1,000 a month,
you know, even
like $800 a month.
If you don't drive a whole lot.
>> Sweet.
So if I understand
you correctly,
you went from roughly $3,000
a month to instantly $1,500
and were able to go down--
>> To about $1,800.
>> $1,800 a month.
>> And that was with a lot
of travel and not being cheap
on organics, and buying--
>> That's a huge saving.
>> --proteins and
stuff like that.
So.
>> Because I've seen some of
these people on YouTube, like,
"Oh, van life is so cheap,
but now my coffee bill,
because I hang out at coffee
shops, has skyrocketed."
So.
>> I had already
been doing that,
so that was already
included in my costs.
You know, in Bellingham I was
going to four to eight coffee
meetings a day.
And that really adds up.
So what I would do in
business meetings is
I would take my
Starbucks receipt
or Woods Coffee in
Bellingham, I would
take it to different
meetings and say hey,
I bought one 30 minutes ago.
You know, I'm here every
day, you guys see me, so.
So they got to know me.
But I would try and save
a lot of money doing that.
But LA, we would go to
libraries, parks, beaches.
You know, a lot of free Wi-Fi.
Near malls, schools, a
lot of things like that.
Housing, apartments.
So we just bounced
around like that
and not try and go
in coffee shops.
>> My name is Chris Paige Owens.
Most people call me Ma.
From vanning, at least.
I live in Puyallup, Washington.
Been vanning since 1978.
Traveled all over
the United States
and even into
England with vanning.
>> So what does
vanning mean to you?
Because you're like, you're--
us young people would say you're
the original gangster, the OG.
What does vanning mean to you?
>> It's family.
It's friends.
It's life.
You look around,
you see the vans.
Young people are
coming back into it.
There's a lot of us old people.
I mean, I'm 71 years old.
So, grandma and
great-grandmother.
But it's fun.
>> Why did you get back--
get into vanning
originally in the '70s?
>> Somebody stopped us on
the road and says, "Hey,
there's a van club
meeting a Shakey's at 7
o'clock on Thursday night."
So we went.
Been vanning ever since.
>> It seems like vans are
becoming more and more popular.
Would you say that was true?
>> I would say that.
A lot of these
Sprinter vans, the vans
are becoming more popular.
A lot of people
are living in them
because they can't
afford the houses.
And they're getting
off the grid.
Or just traveling.
I mean, do it when you're young,
because when you get older
they call it the golden years.
That doesn't mean it is.
I'm Still waiting
to see the goal.
>> So can you give us a tip or
two of something you wish you
would have known at
the very beginning,
would have maybe saved you
a little bit of headache?
>> We bought a brand new
van, Ford van, in 1976.
So what would I do different?
I would have gone in
1976 to some van runs
and found out, like here,
what they look like inside,
what to do with the inside.
Because ours was a
blank screen type thing.
And we put interior
in it on our own.
And then we went to vanity
vans in '78, and found out,
oh, we should have done this,
or we should have done that.
The best thing to do is
go with a blank screen
and see what to do.
That's the easiest
way to find out.
Make it yours, but you can
pick up ideas here or there.
>> Thank you so much, Ma.
>> Yes.
>> So the van rally
just finished.
That was literally my
first ever van event.
And I have to say,
I'm blown away
by how genuine people were,
how excited they were.
I realized at the
event that even
though I'm in the van realm on
YouTube and I make van videos,
doing stuff on the internet by
yourself puts you in a vacuum.
And you never really get
to be part of the community
if you only do that.
You know, for anything, whether
that be vans, or surf boarding,
or skateboarding, or whatever,
I don't think you can really
be part of the community
unless you go out
and meet people that
do the same thing
and actually shake their hand,
and look inside their vans.
That's really what makes
that connection, what
makes that tight knit.
In this video I
really want to get
to the bottom of why
vans are trending.
Some would say why they're
resurfacing, because they
were a thing in the '70s.
And I keep attributing
it to this one thing.
Is it an economic reason?
Is it adventure?
What I think I'm going to
learn in this documentary
is that it's all of the above.
The van package is just
too good to pass up.
It's a truck.
It's an RV.
It's a passenger car
all in one it allows
you to be very adventurous.
It saves you money.
It's all of the above.
So that's my new
hypothesis moving forward.
Next we're heading
to the Grand Tetons
to do more research at the
VanLife Diaries meet up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[YAWN]
Gone camping.
This is why Sprinters rock.
We got to a place kind
of late, 10:30, 11:00.
We didn't;t have to
set up any tents.
We just hopped in the back over
there and we fell asleep. ,
Then we woke up in the
morning and we didn't
have to take down any tents.
We just hopped in the van,
which we were already in,
and we're off.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
OK, check it out you guys.
There's the van.
And we're going to
walk right over here.
Doo, doo doo, doo doo,
doo doo, doo doo, doo doo.
And there's a nice little river.
But when you feel it it's hot.
It's a hot spring river.
There's the van.
Here's our camp site.
[SPLASHING]
Hot spring river.
[GAS HISSING]
[SCRAPING]
So when you're making
breakfast in nature,
you always want
to look around you
because you might just find
some wild growing vegetables.
This right here is wild onion.
The easiest way to identify
an onion is by the smell.
All onions smell the same,
just like a store bought onion.
And today we're just going to
harvest a few for our meal.
And we're only going
to harvest the top.
We're going to leave the
roots intact so as not
to disturb the plant too much.
The seeds and fruits
of a plant are
nature's gift to the creature,
to the animal, to the human.
And so it's OK to take a
couple, throw them in your meal.
And it also makes your
meal more nutritious
because they grow in topsoil
that hasn't been depleted.
Their root systems
are longer, so they're
like nature's super food.
OK.
Update time.
So Kyleigh and I are
driving in the van.
We're heading to the
VanLife Diaries van
festival in Victor, Idaho.
But I've been texting on the
phone with Dave and Diane
from Aluminess this entire time.
And they just agreed
to sit down with me
and give me an interview.
So what this means is we
have to divert a little bit.
And by a little bit, I
mean like 300 to 500 miles
out of our way.
If you're not familiar
with Aluminess,
they are a premium company that
manufactures racks and ladders
for trucks and vans Dave
and Diane have been doing
this for many, many years.
They know all the ins
and outs of van life.
And this is an opportunity
that I just can't pass up.
So this means that we
are probably not going
to be sleeping much in
the next couple days,
because we now have to veer
north to Coeur d'Alene, which
is a few hundred
miles out of our way.
Then we're going to
have to veer south
back to our original
destination, which
is Victor, Idaho.
But you know what, I don't
even care because this
is an incredible opportunity.
And I just didn't
think I'd get it.
Whoo!
I'm excited.
>> So you want to know a
little bit about the van life
and stuff, so I thought I'd
take you back to what I think is
kind of at least a
decent starting point.
And that is the
Volkswagen camper van.
And so that was
around for people
to actually go camp in a van
way back in the '60s, I believe.
I'm not sure exactly
the first year.
But a gentleman,
Charles and his dad
started a company
called Sportsmobile in I
believe Austin, Texas.
They always had a
shop in Indiana,
and they scaled way
up with Volkswagen.
And then West Valley
came on the picture,
or was on there as well.
And then they started doing
Ford, Chevy, Dodge, and so on.
So that was kind of where the
whole van thing originally
was, in my mind, started.
And then in about, till
'91 or '92, a gentleman,
Alan Feld, who actually
owns Sportsmobile West,
he'd worked for me when he was
20 years old in a stockroom
at a medical device company.
And he went on to do some
other things beyond that.
And one was sales, and he ran
into a Sportsmobile, which
was a van converted to a motor
home, a Class B motor home,
they call them.
And he felt he wanted one.
And he found out he had
to go to Texas to get one.
And so he thought
it'd be a great idea
to do a franchise or
something in California.
And Charles, who was the one
who started that or owned it
at the time, was not interested.
Didn't want to
scale up again, he
didn't want anything to
do with another business.
Would just like to have
his little shop down there
and build four or five
a month and that was it.
And so Alan asked me to go with
him down there to talk to him
and see if we could
talk him into it.
So we grabbed on a plane
and went down there.
And Charles changed his tone
after talking both of us,
and said OK and
gave us a go ahead.
I chose not to do it with Alan,
mainly because I didn't want
to lose a friend over stuff.
And I'd done a big business for
a group of open heart surgeons
that, you know, just
don't want to get
involved in that kind of stuff.
So anyway, over the years
Alan basically started
making these vans out
of Chevys and Fords.
And then he started looking
more at the younger people.
Prior to that it was
kind of retirement van.
People would retire,
get one of these,
go see the national parks, stay
in a hotel once in a while.
But they had some camping and--
small camping capability,
but not a big motor home.
So Alan started putting
the big tires on.
And hey, you can go out in
the back country and so on.
And then he got a company
called Quigley Motor
Company to convert some
to four wheel drive.
Quigley Motor Company's back
in Manchester, Pennsylvania.
And so they started making
him four wheel drives for him,
send him out an empty
van, four wheel drive.
He'd convert it to the
whole pop top version
like the one you saw out front.
And then after about two
years, all of a sudden
there was a problem
with four wheel drive.
The front ends
were all worn out.
They were shaking, they
were causing problems,
brakes were
squeaking, and so on.
And they argued back and
forth about the problem,
whose problem it was, and
who's going to fix it.
And actually Quigley, Mike
Quigley back east canceled
all the warranties
on all the customers,
sent them all a letter.
Alan happened to
call me up because I
build the street rods, and said,
"Just tell me how to fix it."
He's really good on the
marketing and customer
service and sales and so on.
But I'm kind of the
nuts and bolts nut.
And so I went up there
and took some apart,
flew back east, worked
with Mike Quigley.
We redesigned the
front end and so on.
But one of the issues was
they were putting these steel
bumpers that were
mainly used on farms
for pushing combines and stuff
around, that weighed 300,
400 pounds.
And the guy's doing 15, 30
miles an hour kind of thing.
And so they were tearing
up the front end as well as
some other issues that we saw.
So I tried to get his suppliers
to make them out of aluminum.
They were quite
rude about what type
of less than intelligent
person would make something out
of aluminum.
If you wanted a beer can
or Japanese pop metal,
go see Coors or Budweiser.
So next thing you know
I'm in my driveway
with a sheet of aluminum
and a saw and a welder,
and I'm mumbling
about those guys.
Because I'm trying to
tell them that fighter
jets land at full
throttle on a carrier,
and that's lightweight material.
It's all about design.
And so I made some
and took it up.
And Sportsmobile liked it.
I was retired at the
time, so I could do that.
And then I went and
found a guy down
on the boat docks that could
weld way better than I could,
manipulate aluminum a
lot better than I did.
And so I just would buy all
the material, take it to him,
all cut out and so on.
He'd weld them up, I'd take them
up to Fresno from San Diego,
drop them off.
And then after
that it just grew.
And then I just started
adding more items.
Nerf bars, rear
bumpers, roof racks,
ladders, that kind of thing.
We started building
these things actually
in the parking lot of sports
fishing company with one guy,
and then I got 800 square feet,
then 1,000, then 2,000, 3,000,
5,000, 10,000.
We're up to 30,000 feet now.
And you know, we bring
people on and teach them
how we want to do the product.
We design it for the features
and benefits that we think,
or that we get feedback
from our customers.
Many of our customers are
depicted in these drawings
here.
They're pioneers.
They find out a way to break it
or something that doesn't do,
and they get a few
errors in their back.
And so we invite them back in
and we replace it or fix it
or evolve it.
So that's kind of our
philosophy is to try and make
the best product out there.
And the reason for the aluminum
is one, it's lightweight,
so it doesn't take
up the suspension
that you need when
you're going off road.
Whereas if you compress
that suspension,
you're back to zero even
if you spend a lot of money
to improve it.
>> OK.
Now you're on the hot seat.
Why are vans booming?
What's your assessment?
>> The new vans, one,
are much more efficient.
So they can get up in the
area of 20 miles per gallon.
They have a lot more room.
They have a lot more features.
Whereas the previous vans
were very, pretty tight.
And when you get
two people in those
there's not much room
to get around and so on.
But in the Sprinter van and
the Transit van and stuff
you get different lengths, so
you can get a lot more gear
in there.
And people are wanting to take
more and more stuff with them.
So it accommodates
more of their toys
and their pleasures of kayaks,
and bicycles, and motorcycles,
and that kind of thing.
I think that they
are more versatile,
they're more economical.
You're going from 10 miles
a gallon to close to 20.
And the longevity.
You know, back early on--
I'm an old guy--
vehicles lasted
80,000, 90,000 miles.
Now Mercedes van has
got a track record
of going 4 or 500,000 miles.
So even though they're
much more expensive,
the cost for the
life is a lot less.
>> How about the types of
people that you're seeing.
Is it young people, old
people, or a big mix?
Who would you say your
average customer is?
>> On a personal opinion basis I
would believe that our customer
base is younger now.
Because the original
van market, I always
labeled as the blue hairs.
These people are
retired, and they
want to now go out and
see the great old US of A,
and they got these vans that
they would camp in their tool
drive, pretty basic, and
it'd allow them to go
to national parks and things.
Today it's the youth,
the sports-minded
has taken their mountain
bikes, and their kayaks,
and their surfboards.
Mexico's a great wonderland.
I would say the big
market we had early on
were teachers and firefighters
who had the time off and could
explore further
beyond the pavement.
A lot of people
that went to Mexico
surfing, fishing,
that kind of thing,
a lot of people
that went to, you
know, off roading and
to the desert and so on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Very nice.
>> There we go.
>> You must be from Portland.
>> No, I'm from San Francisco,
I'm not from Portland.
Jesus Christ.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Cheers.
>> I'm a goddamn San--
Wait, wait, wait for--
I'm going with you.
I'll go with you, too, come on.
Yeah.
Here you go, cheers, guys.
[LAUGHTER]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHATTER]
>> I just want to get
close to the fire.
[CHATTER]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name's Matt Swartz,
and I'm one half of The Van
Project.
Sort of a social
media community blog
that my girlfriend,
Amanda, and I run.
We drive a 1964 Clark
Cortez motor home.
We ended up finding a
small RV, but we still
kind of refer to it as a van.
It kind of feels
like a van to us.
And we've been on the road
for a little over a year now.
Our home is our vehicle.
And we're not tied down,
so we can go over we want.
And we do.
We've been all over the
southwest this winter.
And now we're here in Idaho.
>> My name is Marcella Garofalo
and this is our little trailer.
>> And my name is Taz Darian.
We chose to go with
a trailer as opposed
to a van because we have
the flexibility of leaving
our home at the
campground or wherever
we decide to stay and go
explore in our vehicle.
>> Living with less, you
actually live more in that you
have the freedom to not be tied
down by things and confined
in a box, essentially.
Dealing with all
these possessions.
You really don't need much.
>> You don't.
People think bigger is
better, more is better.
But in reality, traveling full
time in our little trailer
has taught us to minimize.
We actually ended up
going home briefly just
to get rid of half of our
gear because we really
didn't need that much.
We just need the simple
necessities to survive.
Like, the basic needs
really to be comfortable.
And actually living this way
teaches you what you truly
need to be comfortable.
And I don't know.
You're working with
the elements more.
We don't have running water,
we don't have a bathroom.
But it kind of teaches you
to appreciate the things
that you take for granted when
you did have all those things.
>> I'm Josh, and we're driving
a 1987 Vanogan Westfalia.
>> So I'm Jen.
And we've been on the road
for about three weeks.
We're planning to be on the
road for many months coming up.
We're going up to
Alaska and hopefully
all the way down to
Patagonia after that.
>> She's an '82
Vanagon Westfalia.
And I got it a
couple of years ago.
I'd wanted one for a
long time, and we just--
it was lime green,
and that was it.
Saw it, and I was
like, "That's the one."
>> Sprinter was always
the best option for us.
We wanted a four wheel
drive, we wanted the diesel
for the gas mileage, and we
wanted standing room height
in the van.
>> I think most
people I do van life,
they really love the
idea of sustainability,
and being off grid,
and minimalism.
You can't help but think
of all of those things when
you think of a Tesla, right?
Zero emissions,
it's small, they're
also very sleek and minimal.
And I love cars, and
it's sexy as hell.
So how could you not?
Living in a zero
emission vehicle
has offset my carbon
footprint immensely.
And it feels great every day.
Not just driving,
but living in it.
>> My name is Seven Grey,
and I am driving a Stepvan.
This is a 1996
Grumman Olson Stepvan.
A lot of people confuse a
Stepvan with a box truck.
Box trucks are typically
a cab separate front,
and that can either be a van
front or traditional truck
front with the big square,
rectangular box on the back.
Stepvans are more like bread
trucks, or UPS or FedEx trucks.
The front doors
are sliding doors.
They slide into pockets.
And also they have steps right
on the passenger side, which
is where they get their name.
So there's just
a bunch of steps.
And I'm sitting on
the steps right now.
I had a number of
criteria for my vehicle.
And one of those was
primarily headroom.
I'm nearly 6 foot 6,
and a Sprinter van
maxes out at about 6 foot 3.
And I didn't want to walk
around with my head tilting
all the time.
So I needed a vehicle
that was tall enough
for me and in my price range.
I didn't want to finance
it, I wanted to pay cash.
And they're built
for industrial use.
Like, the engine in this
particular vehicle, a Cummins
5.9, is built for
a million miles
because it's an
industrial engine.
I bought it with
10,000 miles on it.
That means I've got 990,000
miles of potential use.
>> We drive a 2006
Sprinter 3500 Dually.
We got married in November 2016.
But we were living in
Denver, had a great life.
Everything was awesome.
And I think we could just kind
of extrapolate out the next 15
years and see what normal
life was going to be for us.
And it scared us
both a little bit.
And so we started thinking
about trips we could go on,
just kind of like things we
can do to change things up.
Started getting involved
in the van life community
through Instagram.
And then one Saturday
afternoon we just kind of sat
down, got out a
spreadsheet, and actually
built out the whole thing.
OK, could we make this work
financially on the road?
What would van life look like?
And then exactly 10 days
later we bought a van.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In 2016 we gave up our house,
put everything in storage,
and we started traveling in a
truck and trailer because it
was a fairly easy transition
from a house to a trailer.
It was 300 square
feet and we could
convince our
17-year-old daughter
that it would be a good idea.
After traveling for about a
year in the truck and trailer
we realized that we were limited
as far as where we could go
and what we could see.
And we started brainstorming
as to what we wanted to do
and how we wanted
things to look.
And a smaller space was not
that big of a transition for us.
And we started
looking around and we
wanted something that
would accommodate all of us
comfortably, we'd all
have our own beds,
except for the two of us,
and we could stand in,
and was good on gas, because
our truck and trailer was not.
So we gravitated towards
a Sprinter van because
of the space and height.
>> Quick tour on the van.
Biggest I guess struggle
was to figure out
how to put five of us in here.
So one of the big things
that we came up with
is kind of a bunk bed
system for the boys.
This platform folds
out, allowing Josiah
to have a bed down below.
And then we got this bed here
that will kind of pull up
into the ceiling,
lock in on the walls,
pull up on some
straps in the front.
And that's basically
Samuel's bed.
So that's how we hold
the two boys in there.
This is where the kids travel.
There are seat
belts in there, that
was a big concern
for a lot of people,
that we weren't going
to keep our kids safe.
So seat belts in there.
Storage throughout the bottom.
This will slide out, allowing
Sarah to have an almost
twin kind of bed system.
I guess in the back we
have a full size RV queen
bed for both me and Tracy.
It also doubles as
kind of our lounge area
when it's movie night, or when
the kids need to stretch out.
Tracy's favorite
place to basically
slide some pillows up, kick
the doors open in the morning.
I make her a cup
of coffee, and she
takes in the view
wherever we happen
to be calling home that day.
Fabbed up this aluminum shelf.
Runs the full length of the
van, allowing each of us
to have two bins
each for our clothes.
If you can't fit it in the bin
it wasn't allowed on the van.
>> I'm 67 now.
But in my late
teens and early 20s
I spent a lot of time
hitchhiking around the country.
And settled down, but I knew
that I wanted to travel again.
And hitchhiking it later
on was not that great.
So I always wanted to do a van.
So we kind of
eventually found the van
that we liked, converted
it, spent our maiden voyage
about five years ago going
through New Mexico, Colorado,
Wyoming, and then back
home to northern New York.
And it worked out fairly well.
>> Sylvie what's it like to
live with Rich on the road?
>> I would say that 90% of
the time it's incredibly
comfortable.
And I never thought I
would be able to say
that because sharing a very
small space is very difficult.
But we really are very
comfortable with one another.
We listen to one another,
we give each other space,
we know how to move
around one another.
So it's been great.
It really has.
And those little rough
moments, we worked it out.
>> So we were just talking about
how and why we're in a van,
and we have no idea.
Like, I really wanted to.
I saw stuff on the internet, and
I was like that'd be super rad.
And then I pitched it to
her, and she's like, "Nah."
And then like a month later
or something, she was like,
"Actually, we should do that."
So then the next week we
went and bought a van,
and then started building it.
So I never really looked back.
We never really questioned it.
It was weird.
>> Julia, what's it like to
have two little ones in the van?
>> It's challenging, but--
>> Good example right now.
>> Yeah.
They're very active.
But I think it'll be good
once we can be outside more,
and we're in more
even temperatures.
>> Which may never happen.
>> Yeah, may never
happen, we'll see.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My reason for living in small
has to do with environmental
initiatives.
I want to reduce my
environmental footprint.
And I felt that when I
was living in the city
I had a hard time
conceptualizing
how much I was using.
And so van life was a
way for me to cut back
on my water use, my electricity,
connect with nature,
and play a bigger role in
being an environmental steward.
And I think it's
definitely done that.
I've been more aware, I
live more intentionally.
And through my
social media I try
to encourage people
to do the same.
Even small things, even if
they're not living in a van.
And next month, July,
I am going to be
part of a 30-day
plastic-free challenge
and I'm encouraging
the van life community
to be a part of that as well.
And so it's a step
in the direction
of trying to make some change.
And I think together
as a community
if we all change we can
have a really big impact.
>> I personally think there's
a minimalism movement, sort of.
And I think that as that
catches on more people
are realizing that stuff
really doesn't make them happy.
It's the experiences that
you have that make you happy.
At least for us,
that I've realized.
So having not very
much stuff helps
you to not be distracted
from the things in your life
and instead focus on the
experiences that you have
and the memories
that you can create.
>> Amanda and I were
living in San Francisco.
We were both
freelancing, and we'd
been doing a bunch of traveling.
We took a 3 and 1/2 month trip
to South America together,
did the whole West
Coast of the country.
And when we got back
to San Francisco
and were living on
our freelancer income,
it felt like a tough
balance to strike there.
The cost of living
was really high.
And just the amount
of hustle that
needed to happen to exist there
in a comfortable financial
state was just more
than we wanted to do.
You know, it was the threshold
between just constantly working
versus doing something
that we really loved
and having some free
time to ourselves.
It felt like the balance
was off much more
in the direction
of looking for work
and being concerned about that.
So we love to travel, and
we had this crazy idea.
Not too crazy,
really, but we said,
you know, why don't
we look for a vam
and see how that could work out.
That's pretty much it.
Cost of living in San
Francisco, man, it'll
make you do some crazy stuff.
>> You, know I think exploration
is as a feature of the human
species is kind of the thing
that is maybe one of the best
parts of who we are.
And I don't know.
I think a certain group of
people are tapping into that.
And not everyone can go
to the moon, but damn it,
you could drive out to the
middle of nowhere, Bears Ears,
and watch the sunrise
over the Colorado River
and have your soul filled.
There's some weird jolt
of serotonin endorphins
that I think feeds some of the
better instincts of our species
in it.
And so I don't know.
Maybe it's an expression
of a good thing
in the species where, yeah.
That's about as much as if--
as far as I've
thought through it.
Try not to overthink it.
Just keep going with
what feels healthy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Right now how I make some
side money in order to support
myself to some degree
is Lyft driving.
And with minimal
maintenance it makes
it relatively
beneficial, especially
versus gasoline cars.
And that's kind of how I'm
trying to get by for now,
until hopefully something
extravagant happens.
>> I guess we're
seasonal van lifers,
so we spend the winters working
and thinking about the Summers
doing this.
>> Yeah.
It's good motivation
to get through work.
>> So I'm an acupuncturist.
I also have a health navigation
slash coaching business called
Evolve Personal Wellness.
And I'm always looking
for clients who are really
looking to make long term
changes that they might have
struggled with in the past.
>> When I was actually
an undergrad I started
an education company
called Learn Fresh.
It's actually a nonprofit.
We partnered with the NBA
and made a fun math game
for elementary and
middle school students.
So we work across 30 states,
about 35,000 students
on a weekly basis.
And our whole team is remote.
Not as remote remote
as we are, but we're
spread out across the country,
we're a distributed company.
And I had this idea,
brought it to my board,
shared with some
other staff members.
And they said, well, as long as
you can still get to the place
where you need to
fly to for work,
it shouldn't be a problem.
And so I'm really
fortunate that I can
work wherever there's Wi-Fi.
I do have to travel
a bit for work.
I'm going to leave her doing
the solo thing with our puppy.
But yeah, that's been
really great for us.
>> One of the places that
I lived for awhile was over
in Taiwan.
And while I was in Taiwan, not
to be confused with Thailand,
Taiwan has a very, very
low cost of living.
You can live there, I had
an apartment $100 a month,
included a scooter and internet.
But you can live in places like
Taipei for $300 or $400 a month
and then eat out every day.
What's unique about Taiwan
is if you have a bachelor's
degree from Canada
or the United States
you are guaranteed a job
teaching English over
there 20 hours a week, and you
can earn about $30,000 a year.
And then your cost of living,
just a few hundred dollars
a month.
You can put $25,000 a
year in a bank account.
And my idea was to save up a
couple of years working over
there and buy rental properties.
And so if you can get two
or three rental properties
you can live easily in a van
for $500 to $1,000 a month.
And you can retire
by age 30, 35,
and just to travel the
world, travel in a van
and never have to work again.
So that's my advice to
people who are fairly young,
is to go that route
so you don't have
to slave away in a cubicle
for your entire life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The biggest non-glamorous
part of van life is sometimes
isolation.
It's-- solitude is a good thing,
but isolation can be a little
bit weird.
Because sometimes it is
just you and your van,
and you've got your--
I have to call it
like almost like
your disposable relationships,
which might be a cynical way
to look at it.
But your friends you make
for a few days and then
you're off on the road again.
Sometimes that can
be really beautiful
and you make lifelong friends.
But sometimes it's
very transient.
>> I'm really longing for
some long-term connections.
And I think this community
really offers that.
These gatherings are a great
way to make those connections.
But life on the road is about
impermanence and spontaneity,
and that can be a little
bit of a struggle at times.
So I like the idea of
resting in between travels,
and doing it as often as I can.
But also just really
connecting with people
in my surroundings
a little bit more.
>> While it opens up a
lot of opportunities,
you also lose out on a
lot of opportunities.
You have to say no to
a lot of relationships,
or have someone be
very understanding.
Or a lot of the couples
you see out here
have a lot of the same wants.
I think for me, what
would get me out
of it is an opportunity
that I want to say yes
to that gets me out of it.
>> I think there's several
different classifications
of people that are
doing the van life.
There's those that are
choosing to do that
and are very actively engaged
in the world around them,
either with employment
and income, the way
they dress, the way they take
care of themselves, the way
they interact with others.
Those people I think
flourish and do
very well walking
into Starbucks or
into any retail establishment,
or going to gatherings.
I think the ones that
struggle are the people that
are forced into van life
without a choice, who maybe have
difficulties
engaging with others
and being socially
interactive in a way that's
not confrontational.
And I think these
people would struggle
whether they're in a van
or living in an apartment
or in a house.
It doesn't really matter.
It's just that they're
forced into a van.
And those particular individuals
I think struggle a lot
in the van life
world and in relating
with what we call "sticks and
bricks" people that judge them.
And maybe they view it as being
judged for living in a van.
But I think it's probably not.
It's due to differences
in attitudes
and maybe the social--
I don't know what the
word, is the social ability
to relate and be able to
communicate effectively
with others.
And they just are not able
to integrate with society.
And the van is irrelevant.
It just happens to
be where they're at.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There's two factors that are
lending themselves to van life
and the popularity of van life.
One is the internet.
In the digital age we now
have really good information
infrastructure with Wi-Fi hot
spots and internet access,
which allows you to have
location-independent type
ability to work
wherever you want.
They've coined the
term a few years ago
called the digital nomad.
Now we have all
these digital nomads
that are traveling the world.
But some of them want to have
a place to put more stuff.
They don't really want to be
as minimalist as a backpack.
So they can still live
a minimalist lifestyle
and combine that with
the digital nomad.
So that's the second
factor is minimalism.
>> One of the reasons why van
life is booming is that people
are just kind of saying no to
this false dichotomy of having
to separate life and earning
money from having fun
and enjoying and doing the
things that you love, right?
And so more and
more and more people
are trying to bring
everything together
into one holistic life
that is fun and adventurous
and also hopefully what
works for you, or for you
financially.
In this day and age, so much
of what we want to experience
is out there, far out there.
And then also there's a lot
of digital experiences, right?
And so when you bring those
two things together, like,
being anchored in
a place is less
valuable to our generation.
>> I mean, I think a lot
of people get into it
because of the
financial difference.
Compared to renting a
house or owning a house,
and it depends where
you live, but it can be
astronomically more expensive.
If you want to be able
to live without the need
to make all that money,
it gives you hat freedom.
>> Or even people
like us, who really,
this is how we vacation.
If we didn't have a van
and we had to book hotels
and eat out every night,
or for every meal,
we won't be able to go the
places that we have been
or be away from home for
weeks and weeks at a time.
So it's a way for us to be able
to see as much of our country
as we can with our budget.
>> My take is that alternative
lifestyles are really the thing
that people are
exploring these days.
And the van life is one
alternative lifestyle.
And I think financial
reasons is, I think,
an important one, and
freedom is an important one.
And just the ability to just
go out there and explore
and kind of break
loose for awhile
is really important to a
segment of the population.
And I think it's great.
I really do.
I think there's so many
ways of living your life,
and the van life is one way.
>> I think the biggest thing
is just that the freedom to be
a creative individual and not
feel the pressure of having
to earn this big income
to afford a house.
I think that's really
appealing to people right now.
And I think especially
people our age, you know,
in their 30s, 20s, anyone.
This is independent of age,
but people are re-evaluating
what success means,
and they're finding
that they can be happy and
feel successful with less.
And this is one way to do that.
[CHATTER]
>> Hold my beer.
Hey y'all, watch this!
>> Whoa, whoa, whoa!
Uh oh.
>> Here's a quick check in after
the VanLife Diaries festival
that we went to
in Victor, Idaho.
We had a fantastic time,
interviewed a bunch of people.
I collected 23 interviews
throughout the weekend,
which was a large sample
size of the people there.
And the verdict is, different
strokes for different folks.
A lot of people come to van life
for various different reasons,
whether that be
financial, or adventure.
And it seems like the
driving force for all of them
a theme that keeps
coming out is freedom.
Freedom from something.
Freedom from bills, paying for
rent, or freedom to adventure,
some form of freedom.
Another pattern that I
noticed in my interviews
is that typically people
seem to be doing the van life
thing full time for
about a year and a half.
There are people
that just started
and there are people that
have certainly done it longer,
but it seemed like
a year and a half
was kind of the mark
people were hitting
before they craved stability.
In my mind, I sort
of drew a parallel
between living the van
life and traveling.
There's a lot of times people,
when they go traveling,
they can keep that going
for X amount of time,
and then they crave just
being back in a stable place.
So a conclusion I
came to surrounding
that was that people really
do use van life as a way
to see the country.
Maybe they get out of college
or high school, they buy a van,
and it's just an inexpensive
way to cruise around, see
the southern United
States, the Northern,
check out the Pacific
Northwest, and really get
to know this country.
And in the wake of the
festival, Kyleigh and I
have been talking about
it repeatedly that we just
want to travel more and make
more time to be out in nature.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Tetons, Yellowstone, June 2018.
Campgrounds are all booked, and
I'd really hate to be in a tent
right about now.
This is one of the magic
parts of owning a van,
because you can get the
best of both worlds.
It's like having
a cabin on wheels.
You can choose to camp
if you want to in a tent,
but when the weather's
absolutely awful,
when it's pissing
rain and hailing,
you can take shelter
in your turtle shell.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Those Buffalo were awesome.
So awesome.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So far this summer
we've interviewed
dozens of van lifers, people
who live in their vans.
We want to go ahead and
switch it up a little bit
to get company's perspective.
So businesses who may be
affected by this van life boom.
We want to see if they've
seen an increase in sales,
who's buying their products, and
what they make out of all this.
>> After a quick stop
at home in Tacoma,
Washington where we backed up
our footage and made sure that
it looked good, we hit the road
again to interview some van
companies.
We plotted a course south
to Fresno, California
to interview Sportsmobile West
owner, Alan Feld, and his son
Jonathan.
Alan is in part responsible
for the camper van
as we know it today.
He's seen all the ins and
outs of vans as they've ebbed
and flowed throughout the years.
And thus Kyleigh and I thought
he'd have some valuable insight
to share.
>> OK.
Welcome to Sportsmobile.
And this is how it
all started here.
This is a 1965
Volkswagen. We actually
started the company in
1961, converting Volkswagens
into little campers.
And then in the mid '60s we
actually went from Volkswagens
to Ford, Chevy, and
Dodges, and that's
what we're doing now along
with the Mercedes Sprinters.
In 1965, in our government's
wonderful wisdom
they put a tariff on these
vehicles from Germany.
It's called the Chicken Tax.
I guess the Europeans weren't
buying chickens from us
in the '60s, so
in retaliation we
put a tax on utility vehicles.
And the little van
got caught up in that.
And I think back in '65 this
van was like $1,800 brand new.
And they put a
$400 tariff on it.
So we sent one of our
kits, camper kits,
to a company in Germany
called Westfalia.
And you guys are too
young, but if you
remembered in the older
vans, the tops all
went straight up and down.
Those are all Sportsmobiles.
Just like our tops now on
the Fords and the Sprinters
go straight up and down.
We have a patent on that.
And then Volkswagen
tops all tilted.
And they did that to get
around our patent, started
bringing the vans in from
Europe to get around the utility
tariff.
Because now they were RVs,
they weren't utility vehicles.
So back then we lost all
our supply of Volkswagens,
and our sales were all
through Volkswagen America.
So we lost our parts coming
in, and our distribution
all went away.
So we went to Ford, Chevy, and
Dodge, and we have sold direct
since 1965.
So these are all
service vans back here.
I mean, that is a
really old Dodge right
there, the 1980-something,
probably, maybe early '90s.
And they brought it in to
have something repaired,
something replaced, add
something, add solar panels.
That one's from Montana,
that one's from Colorado.
In 2015, Ford discontinued
the Econoline van.
And the Ford Econoline was
kind of our claim to fame.
We did a lot of four wheel drive
conversions and everything.
And when they discontinued
it, we're like,
oh my gosh, what
are we going to do?
And luckily Mercedes came out
with their four wheel drive
that same year.
So that kind of saved us.
But people still wanted
the Econoline because
of the articulation, the towing
capacity is 10,000 pounds.
So Ford is going to make
what they call their Cutaways
for the next 8 to 10 years.
And they're making
them for the motor home
market, the ambulance
market, and U-Haul is
one of their biggest customers.
So what we do is we get
this Econoline like this--
which, the good news is it's
half price, the bad news is you
get what you pay for.
And there's not a
whole lot there.
>> And then you guys have to
build the whole back part.
>> We're building the
whole body on the back end.
So again, if you look,
this one's got cherry wood,
this one's got the white
wood, this one's got the dark.
And we have all different
kinds of colors and--
showroom.
So we just signed a new deal
with a company back east called
Quigley Motors, which
is this van here.
This is a Ford Transit, which
is not made by Ford, with a four
wheel drive.
So Quigley is converting these
for us for four wheel drive
now because some people
want the Ford Transit.
They want a gas engine
versus a diesel engine.
One of the issues with
the diesel engines
is we sell to a lot
of people that like
to do international travel.
Well, with the ultra-low sulfur
American diesel standards,
I can't-- you can go to a Baja
now because there's some gas
stations down there that do
have the ultra-low sulfur,
but mainland Mexico
doesn't have it.
There's a lot of countries
in Central and South America
that don't have it.
So a lot of people
need a gas engine
to go international travel.
OK, well this is our classic.
So that one there is four
inches narrower on the inside.
This is our one that's
fiberglass on the back
that we just built. And again,
we have the same box here.
So over where this all
flips out, flips down.
And this has got
the light oak in it.
It's got a little
microwave in it.
>> Absolutely gorgeous.
[CHATTER]
>> Now, my wife and I have
this one with the pop top.
And we sleep up all the time,
except in two situations.
The first one, if it's
really cold outside
we'll camp like this, but
when we go to bed at night
we'll lower the top
because now the furnace
is heating half the space
and it's way more efficient.
And the other time
we sleep down below
is when we're stealth camping.
At the Alani, the Hilton,
the Hyatt, and the Marriott,
we don't put the top up, we
don't put the awning out,
and I don't barbecue outside.
And nobody knows
you're sleeping in it.
But like, Apple, we sold a lot
of people from Apple and Google
because the cost of living
in the Bay Area is so high.
And they're staying on those
campuses in their vehicles.
You know, get up in the
morning, and go to work.
I mean they've got cafeterias
there, they've got gyms,
they've got showers.
We sell to a lot of doctors
that have to be on call.
They have to be at the hospital.
In fact, Globus community
here has hookups.
And they're 50 feet
from the front door,
but they've got
their own bedding,
people aren't slamming doors all
the time and turning lights on.
>> Interesting, I didn't
even think about that.
>> A lot of traveling nurses,
a lot of traveling radiologists
that travel and sit on other
people's businesses while
they're gone on vacation
or at seminars and stuff.
Living out of their vans.
Because they have
everything with them.
My red van, my wife
calls it my man purse.
And every time we go somewhere,
she goes, "Let's take the car."
I go, "I want to take the van."
Because I have
everything with me.
I don't care if the hotels are
booked because I've got a bed.
I don't care if
the restaurants are
closed because I have
my own refrigerator,
I have my own food,
and the best thing
is we have a portable toilet.
And I can actually get from here
to San Diego 45 minutes faster
because I don't have
to stop three times.
I do slow to 55, but I
don't have to pull over.
Every time I pull
over it's 15 minutes.
>> Van life has
grown exponentially.
I don't know if I can
put a number on it,
but it's easily
doubled, tripled.
I mean, probably more than that.
I don't know if I have a
really percentage number
to quantify things, but massive.
I mean it has just been massive.
And just in our business and in
nearby businesses, and people
who are involved in
selling parts for vans,
I mean every industry
involved with vans
just seems to be blowing up.
There are definitely different
reasons for every individual
why they choose the van life.
I think the biggest
one is adventure.
They see the possibilities.
And a lot of our customers
are into the outdoors.
I get people who
ask me all the time,
"Who is buying these things?"
You know, I mean, they
see this factory full.
I tell them we're a
year and a half out,
and they're like,
"Who in the world
is buying all these things?"
And it's like everyone that
is interested in the outdoors.
Do you like cycling,
do you like skiing,
do you like photography, do
you like mountain climbing?
Anything that's going to
take you out of the city
and into the outdoors.
And I can even go
further now, many people
stealth camp in the city.
They'll go tailgating.
They'll use these as just
kind of road trip vehicles
to take their buddies to Vegas.
So there's not just like
one individual reason
to get in a van.
I mean, there's
just a multitude.
People use them
mobile dog grooming.
There's just a
million applications
that a van just fits
really nicely into.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In August and September
we visited more companies
operating within the van realm.
We drove up to
Decked, a business
that makes pull-out drawers
for trucks and vans.
We went to see
VertiRack, a company that
produces ladders and surf
racks for commercial vehicles.
We spoke to Prime Design,
a van accessories brand,
and Road Shower, the pioneer
of pressurized outdoor road
showers for adventure vehicles.
I even flew out
to the east coast
to Manchester, Pennsylvania
to interview Mike and Todd
Quigley from the
Quigley Motor Company
about why vans are popping.
Time and again we
heard the same things.
Business is up,
vans are trending,
social media is propelling
the movement forward,
and vans are
booming because they
offer people freedom and
adventure in a one size
fits all package.
Curious to know more about
how and why social media has
latched on to
hashtag #vanlife, I
reached out to several
popular internet personas
to get a better grasp
on what's going on.
I was particularly curious how
real van life differs from that
which you see on Instagram.
>> My name's Kristen Bor.
I run the outdoor adventure
blog called BearfootTheory.com,
where I share information
about the outdoors
and try to help people
build the skillset they need
to have a good time outside.
I also write about van life.
I love having the van.
It just makes it so much
easier to work from the road
and get my job done
and be able to maintain
my career while still having
the flexibility to travel.
Van life has obviously exploded
over the last few years,
but I think people
have been doing
this for a very long time.
But with Instagram
and the internet
just more and more
people are finding out
that this is a possibility.
And I think also
the internet has
made it easier for people
to take their careers online
and be able to work remotely,
which makes living in a van
full time more viable for
people because they can actually
continue to explore their career
passions while also traveling.
I do think Instagram
has a tendency
to romanticize van life.
People are only showing
the prettiest pictures
of super clean,
tidy van, which is
really unrealistic, actually.
My van is a mess all
the time because you're
living in such a small space.
And I think also it can be
tough to people in the van.
So if one person likes it
and the other doesn't, that
can be hard to reconcile.
And you know you really
have to communicate a lot.
So I think for people who
are doing it as a couple,
I think they get in to
the van and it maybe
challenges their relationship
in ways that maybe they
didn't expect.
I also think you're making
decisions all the time.
What are you going to eat?
Where you're going to camp?
What are you going to do?
I think constant
decision making can
be really challenging
for people who
are used to just waking
up, going to job,
being told what to do,
and then all of a sudden
you come into the van and you
have like so many decisions
that you have to make.
That can be hard for people.
And I think you're
not always staying
at a beautiful campsite.
A lot of times
you're staying either
at a campground or a Walmart,
or on the side of the road.
And it's not necessarily what
people show on Instagram,
these beautiful camp sites.
There's some of that.
But there's also, like,
not beautiful camp sites.
And I think sometimes people
have these expectations
about like what van
life's going to be,
and that everyday is
going to be like the most
exciting day of your life,
where there's a lot of mundane.
Also, you spend a
lot of time driving,
you spend a lot of time
looking for good campsites.
And so I think some people like
the challenges that come with
it and thrive in those
environments and others don't.
And so then that sort of--
in the face of those
challenges it causes stress,
and that's not the
point of being out here.
If you get in a van and
all you are stressed then
that's not really fun.
>> One thing that I just
thought of as you were talking,
so maybe part of the Instagram
appeal is this carefree life.
And then when you get in a van
you realize, well, you know,
life is still not problem-free.
You have to find water,
you have to find a place
to bunk up for the night.
You've got to figure
out what the hell you're
going to do every day.
So would it be fair
to say that you just
trade in one set of
responsibilities for another,
you don't absolve yourself
of responsibility?
>> Oh, yeah.
I mean, yeah.
I think there's a lot to think
about when you're out here.
I mean, we were just
in Seattle, and there's
nowhere to park that feels
really all that comfortable
in Seattle.
So you're in this
cool city and you
want to go explore, but then
where are you going to park?
So I think there's
just always things
that are on the back of your
mind when you're traveling.
You know, there are
tons of responsibility
that come with a van.
I think cleaning a van is
easier than cleaning a house,
but it's not like you just--
I don't think it's as
carefree, and doesn't free you
from some of the stresses
that you face in daily life.
Yeah, so I don't want to make
it seem like it's all negative.
I love the opportunities that
van life has presented me with.
But in terms of just kind
of thinking about some
of the challenges that maybe
you don't see on the internet
and that people aren't
always talking about,
and maybe what causes some
people to quit like a month
or two in that they
maybe didn't expect,
I think that's just some
of the causes I think,
that that may not sit well with
people once they're actually
out here.
>> Is van life here to stay, or
is it a trend that is fleeting?
>> I think van
life's here to stay.
I mean, people have been
doing it since way back when,
when people traveled
in VW buses.
And now I think it it's a more
accessible lifestyle to anyone.
Like, you don't have to be
a hippie living in a van
to live in a van now.
You can have a normal
job and maintain a career
from the road.
And so I think as more
and more people realize
that like, hey, I can
explore my career passions
and live in a van,
and it just, it
makes you able to think outside
the box a little bit more
in terms of the possibilities
for how you can make
money and still maintain your
freedom from a normal nine
to five job, and be able
to travel and work it
all together in a
nice, convenient way,
I think it's here to stay.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In October, as our film
production started winding down
Kyleigh and I continued
reaching out to van people.
We formally interviewed
several new folks,
followed up on
Skype with friends
that we'd made over the
summer, and repeatedly
started up casual
conversations about van life
with strangers on the street.
These additional
dialogues confirmed
what we had already learned.
The majority of people
who come to live in a van
do so because A, the cost
of buying or renting a home
is a burden in today's
economy, and B,
people have the desire
to live adventurous lives
and travel more while
also putting a stronger
emphasis on experiences
instead of things.
I.e, being minimalists.
We also discovered that
reasons A and B are not
mutually exclusive,
meaning that more often
than not vanners come to van
because of both lower living
costs and the higher
likelihood for adventure.
It's also interesting to
note that at least one fifth
of the van lifers that
we interviewed in June,
July, August, and September
ended up selling their vans
and renting apartments,
remarking that van life wasn't
sustainable long-term.
While each party had their
own reasons and explanations
for why they stopped
van life, common threads
could be observed.
Ex-vanners explained that
while living in a van
offered certain
benefits, they ultimately
found it to be lonely and
craved community, namely friends
and family, missed their former
routines, stability, careers,
and lacked an overall
sense of purpose.
In our conversations
together Kyleigh and I
came to agree that van lifers
who tend to thrive on the road
full time and last past
the year and a half mark
are comprised of people who have
a deep love and appreciation
for the outdoors.
Such individuals tend to spend
the majority of their time
outside already, with
or without a van,
and thus thrive as
full time road warriors
once they acquire
a vehicle that's
conducive to their lifestyle.
As for the rest of us, van life
is a fantastic temporary break
from a stuffy desk job, a
reoccurring mortgage payment,
and a traditional,
sedentary lifestyle.
It's also a great way to
experience heaps of adventure
and see our country
for a year or two.
However, for most of
us, full time van life
seems to have big voids and is
not sustainable indefinitely.
Since June 2,
2018, Kyleigh and I
have traveled over 18,000 miles
while working on this film.
12,000 of those miles
were logged criss
crossing the Western United
States in our Sprinter van,
and 6,000 miles were covered
by airplane and rental car.
Over the span of
summer and fall we also
interviewed 40 plus
people in-depth about vans
and informally spoke
to at least 40 more.
Throughout our
conversations we learned
that vans are
increasing in popularity
for several different reasons.
And the first reason
is flexibility.
Vans are a complete
utilitarian package.
They are an RV, and a
truck, and a passenger car,
smashed into one.
Hence, vans offer their
owners complete control over
how they are
customized and used.
Do you want to start a mobile
acupuncture or chiropractor
business?
No problem, you can do that.
Do you have a big family and
want to see all 50 states?
Easy peasy.
And the list goes on and on.
Regardless of what your dream
is, if it requires a vehicle
a van fits that bill.
Secondly, vans are economical.
As the cost of living
continues to increase,
many people choose
to or are forced
to get creative about how
they exist on this earth.
Vans are a viable
solution because they
enable folks to maintain
a high standard of life
without the homeless stigma.
By skipping a traditional
home and moving into a gas
efficient mini bus, van dwellers
can save thousands of dollars
every month.
This in turn takes a
lot of the pressure
away from having to bust
your hump at a job you hate.
When life costs less,
you have to work less.
And when you have
to work less, you
have a lot more free time to
do that which makes you happy.
Thirdly, vans offer
people freedom.
And freedom, as we all know, is
heavily prized in our culture.
For some people, freedom
equals liberation
from bills and the 40 hour
work week, which ties directly
into the point that I just made
about vans being economical.
But for others, freedom has
more to do with spontaneity
and adventure, and
vans are just as good
as spontaneity and adventure
as they are at saving money.
When you hit the road
in a decked out van,
you never have to book a
hotel or make a reservation
at a restaurant.
You can decide to stay somewhere
for an extra day or leave a day
earlier.
And you get to bring the comfort
of your home wherever you go.
A van is like a turtle
shell, providing you
with most of your necessities
wherever and whenever
you need them.
And if this isn't freedom,
I don't know what is.
At the beginning of this
project Kyleigh and I
set out to determine
why vans are booming.
I think we were
successful in this venture
and determined that vans are
trending for the three reasons
that I just discussed.
Flexibility,
economy, and freedom.
As for whether or not vans are
the new American dream, for me
the jury's still out.
Maybe they are,
maybe they're not.
What is the American
dream anyway?
Is it the white picket fence?
Is it the husband and wife,
or the 2.5 kid family?
After pondering on this
concept for many months
I've come to realize that the
idea of any one thing being
the American dream
is preposterous.
There are roughly 300 million
people in the US alone,
and each one of those people has
their own unique idea of what
their dreams and wants are.
Sure, some people want a more
traditional cookie cutter
lifestyle, but others
rebel against this
and strive for an
existence that's
unique to their own values.
And van life is no different.
For some people
exploring the US in a van
seems like an
idyllic, fun endeavor.
But for others this
type of lifestyle
probably seems irresponsible,
claustrophobic, and dreadful.
And there's absolutely
nothing wrong
with either of these stances.
It's ultimately up to
the individual, to you,
to decide which American dream
works for you and which one
doesn't.
For what it's worth, I
still think vans are awesome
and I have no plans to get
rid of my van anytime soon.
And I have tons of
new friends that
feel exactly the same way I do.
So there you have it.
Now you know.
And last thing that I've
been asking everybody
is if you had to describe vans
and van life in one word, what
would that one word be?
>> Gosh.
>> You can't think
about it too hard.
You got to just--
>> Yeah, freedom.
>> Possibility.
>> Sustainable.
>> Impactful.
>> Extravagant.
>> I'd say freedom.
Definitely freedom.
>> Interesting.
>> Peace, I guess.
>> What does van
life mean to you?
>> Sustainability.
>> Roller coaster.
>> Life changing.
>> So van life is rewarding.
It's not always easy, but
for me the exploration
and the opportunity to explore
our lands myself is worth it.
>> Dogs love it.
>> It's natural.
>> Enlightening.
>> Freedom.
>> I would say either the word
is independence or freedom.
>> Freedom.
>> If I could describe
van life in one word,
it would be fulfilling.
>> Unfinished.
Our van's not finished yet.
So it's a bit fair that we
don't have running water yet
and we're under-electrified.
So.
>> I think that the idea
would be adventure, for me.
>> When you say "van
life" I say "freedom."
>> I was going to say dirtbag.
But I don't use that
word very often.
>> You can use dirtbag.
>> All right.
Let's do it.
Freedom and dirt.
A free dirt bag.
>> Free dirt bag.
Yeah.
Free dirt bag.
>> Exploration, for sure.
Yeah.
Explore.
That's just it.
>> Adventure.
>> Freedom.
>> Fun.
>> Simplicity.
>> Oh, it's freedom for me.
>> Learning.
>> There you go.
>> Opportunity, really.
>> Freedom.
>> Adventure.
>> Pure joy.
>> I would just say freedom.
>> I say van life, you say--
>> Wild.
I don't know.
I wanted to say free, but that's
not really how my journey is,
so.